Napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was
Napoleon’s words. “‘I opened my antechambers and they crowded
“was a political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon
from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
“No,” cried he, becoming more and more eager, “Napoleon is great
prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon
“One must admit,” continued Prince Andrew, “that Napoleon as a man
to tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
moment imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just
The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the
“And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?” asked
only telling you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now,
Emperor Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take
Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make Prince Auersperg’s
Napoleon’s army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him
superior to Napoleon’s, were concentrated in one place, the troops
a meeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, a
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were
Napoleon. “If he weren’t afraid of a battle why did he ask for that
that while Napoleon’s proclamation was being read to the troops the
Napoleon’s proclamation was as follows:
down below, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon
army, and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
distinguish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding
“Fine men!” remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier,
“Have some brought from the reserve,” said Napoleon, and having gone
“That’s a fine death!” said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkónski.
Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he
was Napoleon—his hero—but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him
“Ah! He is alive,” said Napoleon. “Lift this young man up and
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in
Guards?” asked Napoleon.
“Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably,” said Napoleon.
“I bestow it with pleasure,” said Napoleon. “And who is that young
After looking at him Napoleon smiled.
“A splendid reply!” said Napoleon. “Young man, you will go far!”
attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield
straight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that moment
seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
Napoleon’s eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
before the battle, the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, and
little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of
unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon’s doctor,
   E’en fortunate Napoleon
Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Orders were
Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon’s
troops had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon
“I should like to see the great man,” he said, alluding to Napoleon,
“I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon,” he replied. The
Emperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napoleon
on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon’s arrival, saw both
Emperors get into boats, and saw how Napoleon—reaching the raft
Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to
Napoleon’s, there were also several French officers of the Guard,
and a page of Napoleon’s, a young lad of an old aristocratic French
from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the
officers, Rostóv had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he
of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the
at the head of them Rostóv recognized Napoleon. It could be no one
that Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalions
shouted “Hurrah!” and “Vive l’Empereur!” Napoleon said
other’s hands. Napoleon’s face wore an unpleasant and artificial
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approached
This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight into
Napoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and assurance
Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand out
moment, laid in it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without looking,
Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touch
and distinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid
Emperor gives it and next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send
Friedland. They said that had we held out a little longer Napoleon would
the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg there was
Napoleon and Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared
in court circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon and one
with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction.
had more than once met and talked with Napoleon.
similar to the Légion d’honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not
Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyántsev and Caulaincourt.
and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic
notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himself
midst of a conversation that was started about Napoleon’s Spanish
then himself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher; and then
a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the
pay homage to her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he
At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon’s
hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.
“If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,
System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmness of Alexander, the
taken proper pains and written a more adroit note, or for Napoleon to
It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England’s
was Napoleon’s ambition; to the Duke of Oldenburg, that the cause of the
from Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178. It
tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander
serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon’s refusal to
been so many less men in Napoleon’s army and the war could not have
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event seemed
otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whom
Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that
Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the
right or wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because he
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent
and even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the
the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander, calling him
into which Alexander the Great had marched—Napoleon unexpectedly, and
brought to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one of the
Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a log
and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where he
found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who
d’honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head.
The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and
Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:
sent for Balashëv and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to
him to transmit those words to Napoleon. Alexander did not insert them
in his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact he felt
repeat them personally to Napoleon.
interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law had
the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his
Balashëv told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the
be brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the next
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakchéev was to Alexander—though not a
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashëv hastened to inform
to Balashëv and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon’s wish to honor him
for Napoleon to come out, were standing at the porch, round his saddle
horse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Balashëv in the very
and magnificence of Napoleon’s court.
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before going
firm and resolute—they were those of Napoleon. He had just finished
When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at the
bent on him confused him. “You are flurried—compose yourself!” Napoleon
“Not yet!” interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to his
told Balashëv to repeat to Napoleon. Balashëv remembered these words,
Napoleon noticed Balashëv’s embarrassment when uttering these last
noticed the quivering of Napoleon’s left leg which increased the more
Napoleon raised his voice.
“The Niemen?” repeated Napoleon. “So now you want me to retire beyond
the Niemen—only the Niemen?” repeated Napoleon, looking straight at
only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turned
expression. This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was
Prince of Baden, but not to me!” Napoleon almost screamed, quite to his
But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all the
not have done more,” said Napoleon, growing more and more excited as he
through my friendship?” demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders
Napoleon—hardly able to keep pace in words with the rush of thoughts
the army unless he is a general!” said Napoleon, evidently uttering
“I know everything!” Napoleon interrupted him. “I know everything. I
you my word of honor,” said Napoleon, forgetting that his word of honor
Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose.
Balashëv knew how to reply to each of Napoleon’s remarks, and would
something, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the alleged insanity
Sweden is practically an island: but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation
to drown his voice. Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which
seized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon
had any significance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them
at the movements of Napoleon’s stout legs and trying to avoid meeting
“But what do I care about your allies?” said Napoleon. “I have
the same attitude of submission to fate, Napoleon abruptly turned
Russian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon was
the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say, “I know it’s
When Balashëv had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, sniffed
his hat and gloves; another brought him a pocket handkerchief. Napoleon,
And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in the reception room
After all that Napoleon had said to him—those bursts of anger and the
shall receive my letter,” Balashëv felt convinced that Napoleon would
Napoleon met Balashëv cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed no sign
At dinner, having placed Balashëv beside him, Napoleon not only treated
backwardness of a people,” said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt for
“But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that,” said Napoleon.
court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon’s dinner, where it
to say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon’s study, which four
days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat
Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than
Balashëv too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turned to him with a
would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon’s,
deliberating,” continued Napoleon with the same derisive and
“And let him know that I will do so!” said Napoleon, rising and pushing
hearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;
Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times up and down
adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. “Are the horses
The letter taken by Balashëv was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander.
In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached
esteem personally. Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general
the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to
and the defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon,
who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justice—a
movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army—news subsequently
a chef-d’oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon’s
Armfeldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had
at the council of war in 1805: there was now a panic fear of Napoleon’s
Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, they expected him
proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like
men. Bagratión was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that. And of
in danger, it was said that Smolénsk had surrendered, that Napoleon had
Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon, drawn from the
sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold
which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon’s power had come
end to the power of the beast, that is, of Napoleon, and tried by the
a moment. His love for Natásha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, the
Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised
Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going
expected—neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those
Napoleon’s experience and so-called military genius, every effort was
saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he
adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and this plan some
Conjectures as to Napoleon’s awareness of the danger of extending his
historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals,
everything was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not afraid
Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the
think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The luring of
Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,
losses but kindling hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we
being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered
to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon’s man
enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon’s attempts at
Smolénsk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon’s
who maintain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of the
After Smolénsk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobúzh at Vyázma, and
they reached Borodinó, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyázma Napoleon
pagodes chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon’s imagination no rest.
Lelorgne d’Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at a gallop
“Well?” asked Napoleon.
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the
to Rostóv, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly’s jacket and on a French
cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride
“The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon’s plain
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily
He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon’s presence could
or Napoleon could deprive him of.
orderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether the
Lelorgne d’Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus:
win, but if later, God knows what will happen.” Napoleon did not smile,
know who Napoleon was, added:
smile,” says Thiers. After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon
Napoleon expected him to be frightened, to gratify his new masters
whipped. “As soon as Napoleon’s interpreter had spoken,” says Thiers,
replaced by a naïve and silent feeling of admiration. Napoleon, after
Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his
Lavrúshka about Napoleon and laughed at his stories, and raced one
“The French,” replied Ilyín jestingly, “and here is Napoleon
can bweak Napoleon’s line of communication!”
militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub—heard that Napoleon
from Moscow, and that there had been some spies and agents of Napoleon
Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamónov’s
“I won’t submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If you
obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutúzov accepted that battle.
have been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles
battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a commander of genius,
occupying Vienna, there is much evidence to the contrary. Napoleon’s
are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the
Napoleon, riding to Valúevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the
side of the Kolochá to the left of the highroad, Napoleon shifted the
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the
flank—still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in the
about four miles away, where Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valúevo
horsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleon or
scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon. At last those mounted men
land, his air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside,
Westphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leading would not follow
of the French Emperor’s palace, arrived at Napoleon’s quarters at
compartment of Napoleon’s tent, where he began opening the box while
conversing with Napoleon’s aides-de-camp who surrounded him.
The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishing his
de Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon’s short hair was wet and
delivering his message, awaiting permission to withdraw. Napoleon,
entrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected
Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they were
battle had been deplorable. Napoleon made ironic remarks during
“I must make up for that in Moscow,” said Napoleon. “I’ll see you
Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear.
But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of this
Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent-mindedly, glanced to the
“Ha, what’s this?” asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiers were
to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for
apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in
him, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries of the
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset’s presence dictated his order of
“Before Moscow!” repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, who was
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. When
Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his
son’s portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.
On the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spent
called genius that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon; yet the
Napoleon, and he himself, thought otherwise.
Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound
left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining
flèches) to lead his division through the woods, Napoleon agreed, though
Having inspected the country opposite the Shevárdino Redoubt, Napoleon
related to Napoleon’s orders to deal with four points—four different
spot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouché; which
done, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not
the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon’s instructions, moved them
it had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.
probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon). So not one of
made by Napoleon during the battle. But this was not and could not be
done, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, as
because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold the
man—Napoleon—to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon had a
If it had depended on Napoleon’s will to fight or not to fight the
Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been
begun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems not merely
events, and that a Napoleon’s influence on the course of these events is
men at Borodinó was not due to Napoleon’s will, though he ordered the
a man than the great Napoleon—demands the acceptance of that solution of
At the battle of Borodinó Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.
not because of Napoleon’s orders but by their own volition. The whole
to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon then
When they heard Napoleon’s proclamation offering them, as compensation
was not because of Napoleon’s commands that they killed their fellow
And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for none
another was not decided by Napoleon’s will but occurred independently of
part in the common action. It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took
previously, is quite baseless, which again shows that Napoleon’s cold on
than previous ones because the battle of Borodinó was the first Napoleon
Napoleon at the battle of Borodinó fulfilled his office as
On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:
Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before
“Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?” Napoleon
Napoleon looked at him.
Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his
Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch.
Guards?” asked Napoleon sternly.
Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that
his order had been executed. An attendant came in with punch. Napoleon
Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one.
“Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutúzov!” said Napoleon. “We shall
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and
himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped
Napoleon nodded and walked away.
At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevárdino.
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevárdino Redoubt where he
From the Shevárdino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the flèches were
to Borodinó, so that Napoleon could not see what was happening there,
Napoleon’s face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at the
Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and in
marshals, kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress
because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon
hands of the French. The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the
troops to cross it? Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
reports Napoleon gave his orders, which had either been executed before
but, like Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fighting and only
without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to
their orders, like Napoleon’s, were seldom carried out, and then but
Napoleon. They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling
Napoleon’s generals—Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that region of
In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat’s
“Reinforcements?” said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, looking at
“Reinforcements!” thought Napoleon to himself. “How can they need
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began
Napoleon, Berthier’s eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, who
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down
“You are very fiery, Belliard,” said Napoleon, when he again came up to
“Now then, what do you want?” asked Napoleon in the tone of a man
“Asks for reinforcements?” said Napoleon with an angry gesture.
Napoleon nodded assent.
the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleon
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing
Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation. Assuming the negation to
“Go away...” exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an
Despite news of the capture of the flèches, Napoleon saw that this was
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of
army aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a campstool
“What? What do you say?” asked Napoleon. “Yes, tell them to bring me my
which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of blood, singly
or in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before
vivants. Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semënovsk, and through the
Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead
the Old Guard into action. Ney and Berthier, standing near Napoleon,
Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time.
attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several
unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought
“They want more!...” said Napoleon in a hoarse voice.
“They want more!” croaked Napoleon frowning. “Let them have it!”
Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner
fifteen years, with the assurance of Napoleon’s invincibility, with the
did not make that effort. Some historians say that Napoleon need only
been won. To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his
could not be. Napoleon did not give his Guards, not because he did not
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling
of Borodinó was Napoleon’s senseless flight from Moscow, his retreat
five hundred thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on
biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him;
human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum of
Napoleon’s army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum.
question for him now was: “Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach
the world he alone could encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear,
Rostopchín had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had
remained intact and that during Napoleon’s occupation the inhabitants
serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon, and that
she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that she had
“If he is accused of circulating Napoleon’s proclamation it is not
Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklónny Hill looking at
he had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious and
distinguish a living body from a dead one, Napoleon from the Poklónny
mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
feel most painfully, I know him.” (It seemed to Napoleon that the chief
Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the
speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.
Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far as
So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy, and
When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow was
Moscow, concealing his name, and must meet Napoleon and kill him, and
to him was solely due to Napoleon.
blow or the death of Napoleon, but with extraordinary vividness and
when killing Napoleon. “Well then, take me and execute me!” he went on,
pistol, dagger, and peasant coat were ready. Napoleon was to enter the
student in 1809 had been to try to kill Napoleon with a dagger. But as
for Napoleon had passed the Arbát more than four hours previously on his
to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon’s having been
Napoleon.”
recall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I,” said the Emperor,
now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.
of Napoleon’s soldiers who were not on duty—Germans, Italians, and
because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because
conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon. In
Murat had not lost sight of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remained
would have happened if on approaching Tarútino, Napoleon had attacked
Napoleon, with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was
between Rúza and Mozháysk. Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as
scattered his forces in large detachments, and with Napoleon and his
Napoleon’s army had only awaited to begin its flight.
Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa; there
incalculable wealth, is in Napoleon’s hands. The Russian army, only half
a whole month. Napoleon’s position is most brilliant. He can either fall
enough in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months. Yet Napoleon,
to him. Of all that Napoleon might have done: wintering in Moscow,
army, as the sequel showed. Had Napoleon’s aim been to destroy his army,
Napoleon, the man of genius, did this! But to say that he destroyed his
The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon’s faculties as having
With regard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entry into
With regard to diplomatic questions, Napoleon summoned Captain Yákovlev,
With regard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that all the
With regard to religion, Napoleon ordered the priests to be brought back
Napoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de ma
Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food
case. The fortifying of the Krémlin, for which la Mosquée (as Napoleon
toward fulfilling Napoleon’s wish that it should be blown up when he
be beaten. The pursuit of the Russian army, about which Napoleon was so
With reference to diplomacy, all Napoleon’s arguments as to his
settled by Napoleon’s visit to a mosque, no results were achieved.
Napoleon’s wish, but one of them was slapped in the face by a French
paper money valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed to the
by the authorities at that time was Napoleon’s attempt to stop the
by Napoleon at a review, evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians
stolen. Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal trésor, but on
skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it
back again, and hastens its own end. Napoleon, under pressure from his
During the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to have been
Napoleon. It was plain to him that all these things were no business
strangely consoling. His intention of killing Napoleon and his
Napoleon’s own. See what horses! And the monograms with a crown! It’s
from Napoleon proposing peace and falsely dated from Moscow, though
Napoleon was already not far from Kutúzov on the old Kalúga road.
to defend the town against Napoleon’s whole army. In Smolénsk, at the
army, that Napoleon was there and the whole army had left Moscow four
“From Dokhtúrov and from Alexéy Petróvich. Napoleon is at Formínsk,”
imagined all sorts of movements of the Napoleonic army as a whole or
Napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow
awaiting him. Kutúzov even imagined that Napoleon’s army might turn back
what happened—the insane, convulsive stampede of Napoleon’s army during
division, the guerrillas’ reports of distress in Napoleon’s army, rumors
“come nearer—nearer. What news have you brought me? Eh? That Napoleon
Napoleon’s historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at Tarútino
happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern
The members of what had once been an army—Napoleon himself and all his
even Napoleon, could say anything against that truth which they all
The day after the council at Málo-Yaroslávets Napoleon rode out early in
Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then, what saved him was the very
men. Disregarding Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleon
to fly as fast as possible along the nearest, familiar road. Napoleon
That Napoleon agreed with Mouton, and that the army retreated, does
not prove that Napoleon caused it to retreat, but that the forces which
told so (on the contrary their superior officers, and Napoleon himself,
and so it is to our own day. All Napoleon’s wars serve to confirm this
then Napoleonic France itself. To strain the facts to fit the rules of
that destroyed Napoleon’s army, is impossible.
Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencing
did that genius, Napoleon, know it, for no one issued any orders to
At first while they were still moving along the Kalúga road, Napoleon’s
Russian army, expecting Napoleon to take the road to the right beyond
thousand men, reached Napoleon at Orshá with only one thousand men left,
campaign, and everywhere are described Napoleon’s arrangements, the
special animals called “heroes.” And Napoleon, escaping home in a warm
Napoleon and his marshals—and that aim was not merely frustrated but all
Napoleon and defeats for Kutúzov.
cutting off and capturing Napoleon with his marshals and his army.
It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon’s disorganized
All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his
But besides the fact that cutting off Napoleon with his army would have
Napoleon’s army was retiring, incomparably greater forces than the
The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except in
own people. The chief cause of the wastage of Napoleon’s army was
French columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteen
they much regretted not having taken Napoleon, or at least a marshal or
campaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon, that he thought of
the advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quite
with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.
in this way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand,
liar, frightened of the name of Napoleon, and that by his blunders at
For Russian historians, strange and terrible to say, Napoleon—that most
human dignity—Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm; he
plan (again one of Pfuel’s) had been devised to catch Napoleon in a
Napoleon meant. He could not understand it. For the representative of
against Napoleon.
“And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have been told?”
means being Napoleon’s guest. Not only did I never see him but I heard
“But it’s true that you remained in Moscow to kill Napoleon?” Natásha
Napoleon to Madame de Staël, Photius, Schelling, Fichte, Chateaubriand,
Napoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campaign of 1813)
The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon cannot be called useful or
Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to
smallest detail for the purpose they had to fulfill, than Napoleon and
oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of
aggrandizement of the great man. It is not Napoleon who prepares himself
not for Napoleon but always against him.
Paris, the ultimate goal, is reached. The Napoleonic government and army
are destroyed. Napoleon himself is no longer of any account; all his
occurs. The allies detest Napoleon whom they regard as the cause of
Napoleon. And all this was found in Alexander I; all this had been
welfare of his peoples—at the time when Napoleon in exile was drawing
said that God, to reward or punish his people, gave Napoleon power and
in the divine significance of Napoleon, but for anyone believing in
people. At that time there was in France a man of genius—Napoleon. He
therefore fought against Napoleon. In 1807 he suddenly made friends
people. Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and captured
arm against the disturber of its peace. All Napoleon’s allies suddenly
raised. The Allies defeated Napoleon, entered Paris, forced Napoleon to
French and the Allies, began to reign. And Napoleon, shedding tears
again ordering their armies to kill one another, but just then Napoleon
the genius Napoleon and, suddenly recognizing him as a brigand, sent him
either that Napoleon was a great genius, or that Louis XIV was very
through Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but we do not acknowledge such
a power, and therefore before speaking about Napoleons, Louis-es, and
events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, and Alexander, or in
event was produced by Napoleon’s power, another that it was produced by
particular person was based. Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon’s
time prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution, of the ideas of
and other things they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon’s
development by Napoleon’s caprice. The ideas of the Revolution and the
general temper of the age produced Napoleon’s power. But Napoleon’s
that Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one may
even conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the cause
plainly that that was the result of Napoleon’s will. Speaking so, the
someone inquires: by what force did Napoleon do this?—that is, wants
Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war. We are so
why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered
Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely, history
then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he was
to Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred
to Napoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with the French went to
Convention, to the Directory, to Napoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII,
to Napoleon again, to Charles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republican
government, and to Napoleon III. When explaining these rapid transfers
of the court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or
and ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot,
event seems to have taken place. Napoleon III issues a decree and the
an army enters Bohemia. Napoleon I issues a decree and an army enters
When, for instance, we say that Napoleon ordered armies to go to war,
commands dependent one on another. Napoleon could not have commanded
If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning an invasion
executed is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon’s invasion of
We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it. In
reality in all Napoleon’s activity we never find anything resembling an
of unexecuted orders of Napoleon’s one series, for the campaign of 1812,
of the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone’s
crafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on. The Napoleonic wars still seem
